---
title: "How the 1990s Made Me an Introvert"
date: 2021-08-30T06:15:00-04:00
---

It may be impossible to prove beyond a shadow of a doubt that I'm an introvert
because of how I spent the 1990s, but I'm damn sure going to try!

Let me be clear: I love how I am, mostly. I just turned 40 this year, so I've
had plenty of time to think about it, and when it comes to my introversion and
my communication preferences, I don't want to change. But what do the 1990s have
to do with it?

In short, I spent a lot of time on IRC.

<!--more-->

IRC stands for "Internet Relay Chat." If you haven't heard of it---which I can
forgive because it's been rapidly dying off in the last few years---it is what
it sounds like: a text-based chat system with public and private "channels,"
private messaging, and file transfer capabilities.

As I [wrote about previously]({{< ref "how-did-i-start" >}}), I started playing
with computers when I was very young, certainly less than ten years old. By the
time I was a teenager, I had the knowledge, interest, and free time to get very
into IRC.

For years, I spent practically every free moment on IRC. When I say it that way
it might sound kind of sad, but the truth is that I made a couple of my
longest-lasting friendships there, and IRC exposed me to people from all around
the world, which I continue to believe was a valuable experience for me at that
age.

Eventually, outside of IRC, I started communicating with all of my real-life
friends through instant messengers. There was ICQ, and then the venerable AOL
Instant Messenger (or "AIM.")

The payoffs were many. IRC provided a *forum-like* experience where we met new
people, traded files (sometimes of suspect legality), and had lengthy group
conversations about topics of interest. It was like a club that was always
having a meeting at any time of day or night.

Meanwhile, instant messaging provided convenience and reliability that didn't
exist in the pre-cellphone world. For me, it was a time of huge social velocity,
even though to any outsider it would appear as though I was just typing quietly
to myself.

As a result of these years steeped in multi-threaded text conversation, juggling
multiple individual chats at once, and learning to express my thoughts and
emotions clearly through writing, I reached a point where text-based
communication was not only *easy* but actually *preferable*.

And look, there are obvious advantages: you can take the time to ensure that
exactly what you want to say is expressed precisely, and nobody will ever see
any half-baked thought that you choose not to send; you can have more than one
conversation at once (though I wouldn't recommend having important or serious
conversations this way); and best yet, you can do all of that while listening to
music, or [relaxing ambient sounds][mynoise].

[mynoise]: {{< ref "entering-flow-state-with-mynoise" >}}

Our lives are increasingly led in chats, whether it's your company's Slack or
your bank's chat bot, or your congressperson's Twitter DMs. I've come to realize
that I'm just *a lot* more comfortable and happy in chat than others, and as our
work goes more hybrid, that feels like an advantage.

How about you? Do you like chat, or does it stress you out?
