---
title: "Managers, Stop Attending Sprint Meetings"
date: 2021-12-23T07:53:20-05:00
---

What does a successful sprint look like? I hope that everyone on your team can
answer that question; if they can't, that is something to talk about *right
now*. Assuming that the team understands what success looks like, why are you, a
manager, attending their sprint meetings?

<!--more-->

It's an open and honest question. What are you bringing to the table in these
meetings? How are you influencing the team, and are all of those influences
positive? What if *your presence alone* is creating a barrier to improvement?

You're probably thinking, "I'm accountable for this stuff, how can I be a
barrier, I want the same thing the team wants!" And you're right, you're
accountable for the outcomes that the team achieves, but the fact is, *you wield
an uncontrollable force*.

Have you heard of the "invisible gun effect?" It's the idea that the presence of
an authority changes an individual's willingness to be completely open and
honest, or to take some action they fear could be judged by the authority (even
if it's the right one!)

As a manager, you carry an invisible gun *all the time*. Your opinion, your
feedback, **carries tremendous weight**. When you are observing, *your judgment
is assumed*.

So, if you believe you need to be in some sprint meeting because you are the
sole member of the team who can offer some specific technical perspective or
crucial context, *solve that problem separately*. Delegate, mentor, and
write. And stop going to (most) sprint meetings.

## Delegate to create opportunity

If you are the manager of a team and also its effective "scrum master" or
"sprint captain," give that responsibility to someone else. There is no reason
that the person who orchestrates the sprint needs any *positional authority* or
hierarchically enforced tie-breaking ability.

If you feel that some architectural decision or implementation will suffer
without your input, you have two choices:

- Ignore it, because when you delegate, *you accept that people do things
  differently than you*, and if you've made the expected outcome clear,
  *implementation doesn't matter*. To ensure that the outcome meets all
  requirements, get really crisp with those requirements. Then don't attend the
  sprint meetings.

- Separate the key architectural or implementation decisions from the sprint
  process; create discovery or design stories and meet separately to align on
  how things need to be built. Bake those decisions into the acceptance
  criteria, and don't go to the sprint meetings.

## Mentorship and coaching are performance multipliers

When you participate in a conversation where you are sharing specific technical
information, as a manager, you are doing two things:

- Robbing someone on your team of the opportunity to share that information, or

- Robbing someone on your team of the opportunity to *learn* and *then share*
  that information.

Instead of being the old, wise technical manager (which admittedly feels really
good, which is why we do it), bite your tongue in that moment and **ask a
question**.

Quite often, you're asking a question that you know the answer to. But by
asking, you are *empowering the team to find the answer*. Be open to the
possibility that their answer will differ from yours. Create the space for your
team to grow, and to fail.

By asking, you are coaching, you are empowering, and you are creating a new unit
of persistent value within the team: the ability to find answers
independently. This value pays for itself over and over. If you just answer the
question yourself, you've created one discrete unit of value that is already
obsolete, and your answer *may not even be correct*. You just wanted to hear
yourself say it.

So when questions come up, and you know the answer, consider asking refining
questions to ensure that everyone understands the requirements, and then bite
your tongue and stop going to sprint meetings.

## Write

There is no greater power that we have than to take an idea within our mind and
embed it fully into the mind of someone else. We have no greater tool to achieve
that power than writing.

It is not that writing, itself, as a superior medium to speech. Rather, it is
that the *prerequisite* of clear writing is clear thought, and that takes effort
and time that speech will not afford you. In this increasingly asynchronous and
geographically distributed world, reading and writing become *thought
superhighways*.

Even the best spoken idea is at best a two-lane highway. A well-composed
one-page document can be like 100 high-speed trains.

When you observe that the team makes decisions that lack some crucial context
that you, as their manager, can bring in from leadership circles or your
experience, *write them down* and stop going to sprint meetings.
