---
title: "\"Blitzscaling\" Is Inhumane and Nobody Should Do It"
date: 2021-05-14T08:43:12-04:00
---

"Blitzscaling" is a distastefully martial portmanteau of "blitz," which is
German for "lightning," and "scaling," which in this context means business
growth. It may have been invented by---and was definitely popularized by---Reid
Hoffman, who wrote the eponymous book.

It's a concept for how to grow a business very quickly, and it works. But it
carries with it tremendous social costs.

<!--more-->

Reid Hoffman is a billionaire tech entrepreneur who helped found PayPal and
LinkedIn, and who presumably knows a thing or two about scaling up a business,
as well as being, in this writer's opinion, rather obsessed with scale
itself.

The basic premise of "blitzscaling" (and I'm going to keep quoting it because I
refuse to acknowledge that it is actually a word) is "prioritizing speed over
efficiency in the face of uncertainty."

The idea is not fundamentally a bad one, and Hoffman's book discusses some
meaningful and valid ways that tech companies can trigger exponential
growth. One is simply by virtue of tremendous margins inherent in digital goods,
and the other is through "network effects," which is increase in the value of a
good from increase in the number of participants (think marketplaces, social
networks).

Where I take issue with the thesis, and where I believe companies have followed
this path and done actual societal harm, is when venture capital enters the mix,
which is practically universal in the tech industry.

In practice, based on the book, "blitzscaling" typically involves dumping
venture capital into growth at all costs, foregoing any steps that would
significantly hinder that growth even if necessary for the business' long-term
survival.

One example given is Uber, which leveraged capital investment to undercut
existing private transportation options, like taxis, and quickly built a huge,
loyal customer base. This works, of course, because everyone loves to receive a
high-quality product at an impossibly low cost.

In a "blitzscaling" company, investment allows the business to temporarily
suspend the rules of the free market, and Hoffman urges founders to push into
those uncertain waters bravely, with little concern for risk, because risk
mitigation creates friction for growth.

But what happens when the venture dollars run out?

Such a business now finds itself beholden to large and influential investors,
who would very much like to see margins remain as wide as possible. In Uber's
case, this means that there is tremendous pressure to keep fares and benefits
paid to drivers low, as customers have been trained to expect this service at an
unreasonably low price and the company can no longer afford to simply eat the
difference.

These companies then become social bottom-feeders, driving another wedge in our
steadily growing income gap to drag huge numbers of marginalized contributors
(Uber drivers, Amazon warehouse workers) through the dirt behind them, while
soaking all of the profits up into distant shareholders' pockets.

"Blitzscaling" is aptly named, because it is a war against the common people.

These "blitzscaled" businesses are touted as revolutionary, as "disruptors." But
is it any surprise that consumers will flock to buy high-quality goods and
services sold at unsustainably low prices?

Rather than creating virtuous cycles of free and fair exchange, "blitzscaling"
companies give consumers idealized experiences built on the backs of a
practically enslaved labor force, bootstrapped through hundreds of millions of
dollars of opportunistic capital investment. Once the investment runs dry and
true market dynamics take hold, what is left is a Wall Street success story
perched atop a mass of over-leveraged immigrants and working poor.

This is as much a condemnation of venture capital as it is of "blitzscaling,"
but perhaps the two go hand-in-hand.
