---
title: "Google's Broken Fix for Broken Phones"
date: 2022-05-25T07:23:27-03:00
---

I've been a fairly enthusiastic Google Pixel owner since the beginning, in spite
of the Pixel line's drunkenly stumbling feature roadmap that makes every Pixel
release feel like an episode of "Deal or No Deal." Since the Nexus 5, I haven't
owned a non-Google phone.

I've been really lucky not to have broken any of those phones... Until now. If
you are a Pixel owner with an intact, unbroken phone, take my advice: try not to
break it.

<!--more-->

This is a story about my new Pixel 6 Pro, which I ordered *on launch day*, like
I have for every Pixel phone I've owned.

I started using it straight away in spite of not having a case for it yet. There
is more to say about how Google managed to sell a new phone with an official
case that wouldn't ship for another *month* after launch, but let's leave it at
"I couldn't get a case on day one."

I ordered a generic case and expected it within a couple of days, so I tried to
be careful, and I failed. It was a simple accident, and with a case I'm sure the
phone would have been fine, but I managed to break the glass covering the
cameras.

Again, there is more to say here about how breakable the glass covering the
cameras seems to be, at least compared to the Fruit Company's camera glass, but
this is not a scientific experiment it's just a story, so let's keep our eye on
the ball, shall we?

## Fixing a Google Pixel

If you are an owner of a Fruit Phone, and if you pay for the "FruitCare"
insurance plan, you can walk into any Fruit Company Store and they will fix or
replace your phone in one hour. The repair option is new for Fruit Company,
which used to simply replace all broken phones, but I am told that the store
policy is that they must have a replacement phone *on hand* for any attempted
repair, should the repair fail.

That's great because it's your *phone*; while you don't have it, you largely
can't be reached. Nowadays, you can't even get anywhere without your maps app of
choice, and that's a topic for another day, but here we are: we're quite lost
without these things (figuratively if not literally), and nobody wants to send
one out for potentially *weeks* for repairs.

Google, however, doesn't have retail stores all around the world, so they did
what any reasonable multi-billion-dollar international corporation would do:
they partnered with a consumer electronics insurance company called
Asurion. Asurion operates a chain of shops called (I'm not making this up)
"uBreakiFix", which was founded in 2009 and has over 600 stores in the US and
Canada.

If you need some repair done on your Google Pixel and you live in the US, you
have exactly two choices: mail the phone to Google, or visit a uBreakiFix
location (if you can find one near you). I live in the Boston area, so I'm lucky
to have *two* uBreakiFix locations nearby, one just minutes from my house, so
that's what I chose to do.

As it turns out, I should not have done this, but stay tuned for the sick twist
at the end.

## Where the Trouble Starts

If I had to "bottom line" the troubles I've had in getting my Pixel 6 Pro
repaired, I'd say it is all on account of Google's inability to execute this
repair relationship with Asurion/uBreakiFix, which includes not only
communicating expectations with the entire organization, but aligning parts
supply chains and ultimately overseeing the consumer experience (even
slightly).

The first time I contacted a nearby uBreakiFix location, I learned that they
didn't have parts other than screens for Pixel 6 Pro phones (the phones having
been released just weeks prior), and the person I spoke to suspected that for
broken camera glass, they'd have to replace *the entire back* of the phone and
they didn't have any of those parts.

At this point, the camera worked, and it even worked surprisingly well
considering the cracks in front of it, so I chose to live with it and check back
in at some later date when more parts might be available.

{{< dots >}}

Fast forward seven months, and I find myself talking to uBreakiFix about a
laptop battery replacement. That's another whole story, but my local shop did a
great job (and fast!) replacing the battery in my years-old MacBook Pro, so I
asked once again about the phone glass.

This is when things start to go sideways.

## The Trouble Escalates

A very nice guy at my local shop was confident the glass could be fixed. Upon
some investigation, we discovered that the camera glass piece itself is now
available, and can be replaced without touching the rest of the back of the
phone. He said he'd order the part and could do the replacement as soon as it
came in.

One thing that put me off about the process, and where I think Google is
seriously dropping the ball, is that this guy at the repair shop was literally
searching YouTube for how to replace this part, because evidently being Google's
"authorized repair partner" doesn't mean you get any sort of, I don't know,
*service manuals* or anything.

Moreover, they do have access to parts, but of course all of the Pixel phone
parts are ham-handedly smashed into Asurion's internal parts database with
sometimes inscrutable names like "camera carbon fiber sheet" and no separate
reference as to where the part is in the larger assembly or even a picture in
many cases.

About a week later, the camera glass piece came in, and I left my phone with
them to repair for the weirdest couple of hours during which I *listened to
terrestrial radio* in my car for the first time, um, ever.

I was so excited to pick up my newly fixed phone with pristine camera glass, it
would be *just like new*, it would be *finally whole again* after so many
months.

But as you'd expect by the section heading, my troubles were not over. Indeed,
the glass was fixed, hooray! But some tiny broken glass pieces and dust remained
inside, and the camera image revealed spots. That's bad enough, but the
autofocus also refused to work.

In short: my phone was now more broken than it was before.

## Blame Google

The guy who did the repair was *incredibly* apologetic, and he actually tried
two times to remove the glass again and clean it all out while I sat and
waited. Unfortunately, for whatever reason, it didn't work.

Certainly there are criticisms that I could level against uBreakiFix here. I
don't know what training, if any, they are offering these techs. Considering the
YouTube searching I witnessed, and the mention of "checking eBay" for some
parts, I'd say they operate more like freelancers than employees of an
international insurance company authorized by the device manufacturer.

They're not doing these repairs in what you'd call a "clean room." There is a
semi-frosted glass partition between the storefront and the back room, but it is
easy to make out that each employee has a desk where they do repairs and also
eat their Lay's potato chips, an open bag of which I could clearly make out.

While you may or may not choose to leave your device at any uBreakiFix you walk
into, Google's authorization of this chain is a stamp of approval from
them. This is Google saying aloud, "Go have your $1,000 Pixel 6 Pro repaired by
potato chip guy."

Expect this process to take weeks, because they'll have to order parts they
"think" might be the right ones, given no official reference, and they'll be
looking up how to do it on iFixit just like everyone else.

## My Phone Gets Broken Again

uBreakiFix warranties their own work at least, so I was entitled to a resolution
since their camera glass repair was botched. The tech told me that he could
order a whole new back camera module and replace the whole thing for free.

I returned, weeks later, after a lengthy family vacation in which I had no
properly working phone camera, and they replaced all of the back cameras. It
worked!

... But the front camera stopped working. Of course, I didn't realize this in
the store because who tests the front camera after replacing the back cameras?
Well, not me, anyway.

I returned to the store and the tech told me that of course they'd order a new
front camera module as well and replace that. I may have made a joke about the
[Ship of Theseus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ship_of_Theseus) at this point.

## Google Support Gets Involved

Replacing the front camera module did not resolve the issue. Factory resetting
the phone did not resolve it, either. The repair shop also did some black magic
software reset operation that they couldn't explain to me that failed to resolve
the problem as well.

Entirely out of options at this point, the repair tech attempts to call Google
Support to escalate to their warranty service. He is hung up on by their
automated phone tree twice. He begins a *chat* with them.

This tech sits in a chat with Google Support for at least 20 minutes while I
wait in the storefront twiddling my thumbs (doing NYT crossword puzzles,
actually).

Finally, he emerges and tells me that it should be sorted out, but I have to
chat with them because they always want the customer to confirm that it's their
device and they are asking for this service and so on, so I get into a chat with
Google Support on my broken phone.

This chat then also takes at least 30 minutes, during which time the support
person asks me to wait while they "check on things" numerous times for as long
as 5-7 minutes each time.

Despite having a case ID for the tech's original chat and access to the entire
transcript, after 30 minutes of chatting, it is clear that Google Support is not
aware that I am in the shop and that the shop has repeatedly failed to repair my
phone.

They actually *recommend to me that I visit a uBreakiFix store*. Between bouts
of near-nauseous laughter, I tell the tech that not only am I *standing in a
uBreakiFix store at that exact moment*, but the store has *failed to repair my
phone multiple times*.

Finally the Google Support person relents and informs me that they'll have to
loop in some higher-level people, and they'll have to email me back when they
have an answer.

I storm out of the store, dissatisfied, feeling led on, and frustrated with how
difficult it has been to reach the breaking point where they'll just give me a
new phone and be done with this.

## Escalation Is the Way

From this point, I receive update emails from Google Device Support every day
or two telling me that they are sincerely grateful for my patience as they work
with their "specialist team" to find some resolution for me.

This goes on for *eight days*.

Finally, this message comes through:

> Hi Aaron,
> 
> Thank you for contacting Google Support.
> 
> I appreciate your patience in this regard and apologize for the delay in
> providing the information.
> 
> I certainly understand the point. However, I would request you to please visit
> the repair center again, as the device is in 90 days of extended warranty and
> it will be repaired free of cost.
> 
> In case you experience any issues post visiting the center, you can reach out
> to us or reply to my follow up email. I'll take this case forward and help you
> further.

It is at this point that I decide that Google Device Support is not going to be
able to help me. I start configuring Fruit Phones on the Fruit Phone Store and
looking up the price of refurbished Pixel 6 Pro phones on eBay.

I wrote a lengthy, polite, but stern reply to Google Device Support informing
them of the entire sequence of events that I have experienced since the
beginning of this insufferably long saga, in the hopes that perhaps they simply
haven't collated all of the information to understand the reality of this case.

Simultaneously, I hopped on Twitter and posted a [lengthy screed][tweets] in
which I voiced my frustration with how drawn out this whole process has been.

[tweets]: https://twitter.com/aaronbieber/status/1560570152458010624

In that thread, I named both `@Google` and `@MadeByGoogle` (the account dealing
with all Google hardware products). Within an hour or two, `@MadeByGoogle`
replied saying that "that's not the experience we want you to have" and offering
to work with me via DM.

I DMed them my two case IDs, and expected that they'd 
[ghost me like iRobot did]({{< ref "blinding-my-roomba" >}}). Instead, I
received an apologetic DM informing me that they've escalated my case to "a team
that handles escalations" and that I should expect a reply in 24-48 hours.

A few hours later, I received an email from the "Social Support Team" offering
me a warranty device replacement.

## Google Support Is Broken

Why does Google's Social Support Team have so much more influence and agency
than the official Device Support channel that you can reach via their support
website?

Why do techs at *Google-authorized repair shops* need to open chats with Google
Device Support staff to escalate a failed repair? Even when they do, why does
Google distrust their reporting of events? (I should note that I also provided
Google with the uBreakiFix work order number, which presumably outlines all of
the repair attempts and part orders).

In the future, if you have an issue with some piece of Google-branded hardware,
it seems that your *first stop* should be Twitter, to moan publicly about how
bad an experience you're having, because if Google cares about anything it's
their public appearance.

## Repair Is a Product Feature

Even in a world where we're being conditioned to believe that phones are
"[throwaway devices][throwaway]" and where "VIN locking" is rampant and has 
[likely killed people][medtronic], the ability to have an expensive device repaired,
even at great cost, through official channels *is* an expectation.

[medtronic]: https://pluralistic.net/2020/07/10/flintstone-delano-roosevelt/#medtronic-again
[throwaway]: https://www.vice.com/en/article/43kp8j/lawmaker-kills-repair-bill-because-cellphones-are-throwaways

It's *irresponsible* of Google, a multi-billion-dollar international
corporation, to do such a half-assed job of Pixel repair after this many years
and iterations of Pixel phones. Full stop.

uBreakiFix has ordered an entire replacement camera module for my phone, and I'm
sure that the tech who messed up the glass repair is going to be extra careful
in replacing it for me, and I'll update this post when it's all over.

To be clear, I'm not blaming uBreakiFix, or even this specific tech for these
issues. Accidents happen in repair, and the job is tricky. But it's made
impossibly hard by the absence of official documentation, availability of parts,
and support for doing the job in the way that Google should want it to be
done. The whole situation reeks of corner-cutting in a way that Google is kind
of notorious for.

But what can I do? Get a Fruit Phone? That's a topic for another---much
longer---post, I think.
