---
title: "I am anti-obsessive"
date: 2023-03-30T13:21:37-04:00
draft: true
---

How does anyone sustain interest in a single thing for years at a time?

I recently watched "Free Solo," the National Geographic documentary about Alex
Honnold's world-record-setting climb of El Capitan in Yosemite National Park.

In spite of the knowledge that he succeeds and doesn't get permanently injured
or die, watching it was very emotional for me. I can't readily describe the mix
of feelings I had while watching his solo ascent. Some combination of awe, fear,
and confusion.

The awe and the fear are obvious enough; it was an incredible physical feat with
the possibility of certain death, my hands were sweating the entire time just
watching it.

The confusion comes up when I think about the discipline and devotion to the act
that made it possible. What does that *feel* like? It's completely foreign to me.

<!--more-->
{{< dots >}}

My best friend for over 20 years has been traveling around the country with his
daughter making [absurdly large landscape photographs][vast]. They started just
before the pandemic hit and have been at it ever since.

[vast]: https://vastphotos.com/artist/chris-blake

Part of his goal is to take his daughter to every US national park before she
turns 18, which is a very cool---and ambitious---mission. But the photography
thing is just a hobby; he sells one now and then, but he has a full-time day job
and mainly pursues the photography for fun.

How does one stay interested in getting up before dawn to shoot a sunrise for
five years? Or even two years?

{{< dots >}}

I went to high school with a dude who is really into Star Wars. Like really into
it. Saw all the movies, read probably hundreds of books published within the
franchise (canon and otherwise). He builds every Lego Star Wars "Creator" set
that comes out (I think he has *two* Imperial Star Destroyers), and watches
every Star Wars show that they make.

To be clear, I'm not throwing shade here. Disney bought Star Wars because it's
wildly, wildly popular, and nobody should feel any shame for loving the shit out
of it. I also like Star Wars! *The Mandalorian* was a great show that my wife
and I both enjoyed.

But... I have trouble imagining what it's like to be that committed to that one
thing. As much as I enjoy Star Wars, and Lego, and science fiction in general, I
can't fathom what it feels like to have that level of devotion.

{{< dots >}}

I really don't mean to come across as unappreciative or condescending here. I
actually *envy* my friends' abilities to pour themselves into something that
brings them continuous, long-term joy and satisfaction. It's just that I don't
understand it.

There's something about how I experience the world that makes me flit from one
thing to another, pausing only long enough to reach some self-satisfying level
of proficiency before moving on. I've done this for so many things, even hard
things, but eventually I am drawn away. Things I've pursued include:

* Fountain pens (I own more than 10)

* Mechanical watches (I'm embarrassed to say more)

* 3D modeling in Blender

* Generative art in Processing and processing.js

* Eurorack modular synthesis (only emulated, though; dodged that bullet!)

* Video editing (even bought a license for Resolve Studio)

I should point out that by "mechanical watches" and "fountain pens," I don't
just mean that I went on Amazon and bought some. Oh, no, I fell down the rabbit
hole of the styles and distinctions, inner workings, respected brands and their
histories, steeped myself in the various Reddit communities, and so on.

For those months when I was *really into fountain pens*, for example, you'd
think "this guy is totally obsessed with fountain pens." All I did was try new
ink samples and watch YouTube videos about handmade pens and use different
notebooks (LEUCHTTURM1917 are the best, by the way).

But none of those (or anything else, really) has been my *lodestone*, drawing me
back time and again, to continue to go deeper and further with it. I'm quite
satisfied with how much I know about Omega's "co-axial escapement," or what it
means to route "control voltage" in a Eurorack system.

I don't hunger for more.

{{< dots >}}

I didn't put photography or writing on the list. Those are as close as I've come
to interests that persist. But even with writing, I don't feel a draw toward it
every day or even every week (observe the sporadic post history here for
context).

There was a time when I was taking photography very seriously. Traveling, taking
thousands of photographs, printing and framing them, and
[writing about it constantly][ssp], but even within that broad interest, I
changed cameras, changed lenses, and became temporarily enamored with various
techniques like long exposures, light painting, and so on.

[ssp]: https://www.singleservingphoto.com

Am I confusing discipline and persistence with joy?

{{< dots >}}

I don't know what any of this actually means, or if it's even important, but it
felt like a topic I should try to write about to help *myself* to try to
understand it.

If any of this feels familiar to you, I'd love to hear about it.

What are *your* obsessions?
