---
title: "My Surface Pro Journey"
date: 2020-01-21T15:09:15-05:00
draft: true
---

To start, let me warn you that this journey is somewhat circular, as I venture
into the world of the Microsoft Surface Pro 6 only to ultimately arrive back
where I started, except more disappointed and with less money.

But if an exploration into the pros and cons of the Surface Pro (the previous
generation at the time of this writing, I grant you) interests you, then please,
do read on.

<!--more-->

## Why Surface Pro 6?

Every good story has a beginning, a middle, and an end. At the beginning, I
decided to buy a Microsoft Surface Pro 6. But why? That's an extremely good
question.

I haven't written much about this yet, but I'm pretty big into photography. As I
have perpetually chased the best Adobe Lightroom and Photoshop performance, I've
purchased progressively more expensive Mac laptops, though the performance I've
gotten out of them has never been what I expected for the price.

I still really like the Mac platform and its ecosystem, but I took the plunge a
while back and build a custom desktop PC that blows away my Mac laptops in
performance. I was a PC guy a long time ago (a long, long time ago) and now I'm
a... Multi-platform guy, I suppose.

Anyway, that's really only tangentially important, you just need to know that I
am a Lightroom user and that I have a PC as my primary workstation at home.

Fast forward a little bit and I see someone at work using one of these e-ink
tablets for note-taking. I immediately interrogate him about it, being a huge
fan of the idea of digital pen and paper, and discover that it's kind of a crap
product for the price and he only uses it out of guilt for how much he spent on
it (that's a very loose interpretation, but I'm sticking with it).

He mentioned that if he did it over, he'd look at the Surface. Hm, Surface, you
say? A Windows tablet with a stylus? Interesting.

It then occurred to me that I could probably run Lightroom on such a thing and
it could do double-duty as a note-taking device for work and a light
post-processing machine for photo trips. Two birds dead, only one stone
thrown, and if there is anything that I love more than killing birds it's
efficiency.

That's a joke, I don't hate birds, but what does it matter, birds aren't real
anyway.

This is where the story hits a point where you're either going to be with me or
against me, so buckle up.

## The purchase

I went to a physical Microsoft Store, which I am fortunate (?) enough to have
right in the town I live in. Ironically it is in a shopping mall directly next
door to an Apple store. This is hilarious because there used to be a store
between them, but that store left and Apple soaked up their space to make their
store *even bigger*, and also putting them directly next door to Microsoft. I'm
sure that many chuckles were had at both companies about this.

I digress. I went there and I played with the Surface Go and the Surface Pro 6
and it was obvious that the Surface Go would be far too underpowered for, well,
basically anything, it's like an Amazon Fire tablet with an optional expensive
stylus, I don't think anyone should buy one of these.

The Surface Pro 6, with its optional magnetic keyboard cover and stylus seemed
like such a nice little setup. One of the associates on the floor told me that
it was not likely that it would run Lightroom very well, but that I could take
30 days to try it out and return it if it didn't work out. That was enough for
me.

There are two CPU tiers of the Surface Pro 6: one with an 8th generation Intel
Core-i5 8250U at 1.6 GHz (turbo to 3.4 GHz), and one with an 8th generation
Intel Core-i7 8650U at 1.9 GHz (turbo to 4.2 GHz).

I've had people tell me that I made a mistake not buying the i7, that Lightroom
performance would have been significantly better. I suppose that is possible,
though the difference in core speed is not significant and both CPUs have the
same number of cores. What is significant is the difference in price: The
Surface Pro 6 with the i5 was $900, while the i7 version was $1,500.

Now, part of that jump in price is due to the fact that Microsoft offered a 128
GB storage option on the i5 version and not on the i7; the minimum storage you
could get with the i7 was 256 GB. Nevertheless, $1,500 was too much for me to
stomach, especially after adding the $100 "Surface Pen" and the $140 "Type
Cover" keyboard folio.

Moreover, performance isn't *really* the problem. It's just one of the
problems.

## Tell me about the problems!

Oh I'd love to.

So, the i5 Surface Pro 6 doesn't perform very well, but as a "Chromebook" style
of casual use device, or even for OneNote and various Windows-native
productivity apps, it works great. You can certainly load up some Office apps,
Dropbox, your chat programs, Firefox, and so forth and get rolling.

The Microsoft "Type Cover" keyboard is nice, easy to type on, feels pretty good,
although the trackpad is unmitigated garbage, like virtually every trackpad for
Windows that has literally *ever existed*. But hey, you have a full touchscreen
to help you feel less bad about that.

Other than the trackpad, the only other criticism I have of the Type Cover is
that it does feel somewhat too flimsy if you use it on your lap or some surface
other than a desktop or tabletop. It's workable, you can type on your lap, and
really the biggest problem with lap use is not the keyboard but rather the
"friction stand," but I won't go too much into that.

I love the friction stand. If you set aside the "I can't type on this on my lap"
problem, the friction stand lets you have exactly the viewing angle you want,
and everyone should think about implementing something like this, it is truly
freeing.

But those are not the deal-breakers. The real deal-breakers for this device are:

* Windows 10 "Tablet Mode" sucks, and
* The Surface Pro 6 is a fragile, weak little plastic sandwich that is so
  portable you want to take it everywhere, and yet cannot survive going
  anywhere.

OK, one thing at a time:

## Windows 10 tablet mode sucks

Windows 10 is such a fascinating demonstration of a product management team
trying desperately to paint enough lipstick on a pig that the enlightened
consumer, who has been programmed by Microsoft's competitors to desire and
indeed expect a certain UI pedigree, will actually believe that Microsoft is
advancing Windows boldly into the current generation of software.

What that wide-eyed and naive consumer does not realize is that Windows 10 is
just the next thin layer of paint over an aging system that, in each of its many
iterations, has failed to jettison even a single crumb of technical debt in the
name of backwards compatibility and is now a truly spectacular house of cards, a
renewed facade on a building crumbling under its own weight.

They're trying, I really think that they're trying, but take for example the new
Settings app, which presents a UI redesigned to appear modern and sleek and
intuitive. You only have to click around for about two minutes before you
see one of these "Additional XYZ options" links on the right, so you click it,
and *what in the holy hell is that*?? Oh yes, it's the original Control Panel
application in all of its 1995 glory, which has not gone away, but is rather
*proxied* (in part) by the Settings app.

And that, in and of itself, is not a problem, but it's an example of the real
problem, which is that Microsoft does not have the buy-in, or the wherewithal,
or perhaps simply the balls, to *actually re-think anything*. They hired some UI
people and they said "make this shit not look like shit," and those UI people
said "great, let's address the *fundamental information architecture problems*
here" and Microsoft said, "no, you are not permitted to meddle with anything
that might be used by one PowerShell script in one enterprise customer's
deployment of this software, so just fucking skin it, OK?"

And skin it they did.

And then tablets happened. More specifically, the iPad happened. And once again,
Apple made a bold move toward a non-laptop tablet device, a move that is still
being questioned and analyzed but absolutely cannot be criticized as *not bold*,
and companies like Microsoft are struggling to follow in their own way, which is
to say, in a milquetoast, half-assed, *doing it because those guys are but
betraying the actual spirit of it* kind of way.

Because, as you most certainly are aware, the iPad is not a laptop. The iPad Pro
gets as close as I think Apple is actually willing to get (topic for another
post), but it is not a laptop. The Surface Pro 6 is absolutely a laptop, it runs
full Windows 10, but full Windows 10 lacks any modicum of touchscreen usability,
and so Microsoft in their deepest wisdom have created Tablet Mode.

Tablet Mode is an attempt to make Windows 10 usable with only a touchscreen
input device. It's not an altogether bad attempt, but it fails for a few
reasons:

1. Windows programs, by and large, were not designed to be usable with only a
   touchscreen input device.
   
2. At times, and these times come more often than you'd like, it feels like
   Windows 10 itself was not designed to be usable with only a touchscreen input
   device. If only there was some sort of "Tablet Mode..."

The experience feels like what you probably would expect from a touchscreen
Windows computer. You can launch and switch between programs with touches that
all make sense and work great. Then you have to interact with a program that
isn't designed to be touched with a finger or stylus and it fails in hilarious
ways.

Then you have to enter some text, and the keyboard pops up, and sometimes it
overlaps something you need to see, such as *the actual field you're entering
text into*, but that's OK because it's dreadfully hard to move the keyboard
around in any predictable way so you end up mashing your fingers all over the
screen and finally throwing the entire Surface Pro 6 out the window because if
you see it hit someone and knock them down at least that will tickle some of the
schadenfreude that has been building up gradually in your entire body since you
started using the infernal thing.

For a moment you imagine what it would be like to use the Surface Pro 6 as a
paddle to beat the living shit out of whoever it is who thought that this pig
could be painted a dainty shade of red in just the right places so as to, even
momentarily, convince an onlooker that it is something other than the pig that
it is.

Ultimately, this is what it looks like when you try to glue a completely
distinct and singularly nuanced input paradigm onto an operating system and its
ecosystem of software that was entirely conceived of in an era when such an
input paradigm could only be imagined by the big brains at Bell Labs or Xerox
PARC. This is what happens when you make the *timid move*.

If you're reading this, Microsoft, the lesson to take away here is that the
sales of the iPad are not any indication that the public wants a *tablet
computer*, it's only an indication that they want *an iPad*. And that's a
completely different thing, isn't it?

## The Surface Pro 6 is a fragile plastic sandwich

My first real test for the Surface Pro 6 was a family trip to Bermuda, on which
I was poised to take lots of photographs and videos, so I could exercise my
Lightroom setup.

Getting ready to go, I packed up my photography backpack, which is a Peak Design
Everyday Backpack 30L (I really like this bag and may review it somewhere
eventually, but a lot has been said about it on the internet already so I'll
probably spare you those additional ramblings).

The Surface Pro 6 is so small, it easily fits into the *generously padded*
laptop/tablet pouch within the Everyday Backpack. Off we went!

The trip was great, we had a grand time exploring the island, and I got to play
with my newly acquired GoPro Hero 7 Black, which is a truly impressive little
piece of kit.

That is, until one evening as I was waiting for a photo import to complete,
which on the Surface Pro 6 usually takes about 45,000 years, and I noticed a
hairline crack right across the whole screen!

Now, the thing had been sitting on the desk in the hotel room since the moment
we got there, so it must have happened while in the backpack. And I know what
you're going to say: maybe the backpack isn't suitable for this, maybe the
tablet pouch was deformed across my back, maybe I wasn't gentle enough with it
while stowing or retrieving it on the plane, etc., etc.

To that I say, I did not do anything to this device that a reasonable person
with broad experience in consumer electronics and even portable electronics
wouldn't do. I have traveled with laptops and tablets of other kinds and none of
them ever had their screen crack straight across.

So that sucks, apparently you need to encase your Surface Pro 6 in some kind of
rigid body case (I never even looked to see if such a thing exists) because the
Type Cover provides no protection from the Surface Pro's flimsy plastic body
deforming, nor, apparently, does a padded, purpose-built tablet pouch in my
high-end photography travel backpack.

I jumped online to see what I could do about it.

You'll be relieved to know that Microsoft considers a broken screen to be
*excluded* from their warranty, so you're on your own to seek repair, which they
will happily perform for you at the very reasonable cost of $400, which by
itself is 44% of the cost of the whole device and would result in far less joy
than literally smashing the thing on the pavement in 60 fps slow-motion and
setting it to "Damn It Feels Good to be a Gangsta," which I would do immediately
if I wasn't terrified of being hunted down and killed by the Geto Boys'
attorneys, or, "fixers," or whatever they have.

## So, should you buy one?

I mean, knee-jerk reaction here... Hell no.

But your mileage may vary. Perhaps you have enough cash to step up to a higher
performance tier, or perhaps you only need to run lightweight native
applications like OneNote, and perhaps you are going to use this thing strictly
in a controlled work environment free from, like, *backpacks*.

I came down pretty hard on Microsoft here, which I think they need to hear, but
I also see that they're iterating and maybe they'll catch up to themselves at
some point and some revelatory thing will happen and Windows 10 tablet computing
will suddenly be usable or, dare I suggest, even enjoyable. It isn't that today,
though.

The fundamental flaw in a Windows 10 tablet computer is that Windows 10 isn't a
tablet operating system, and as you're using it it's really hard to shake the
constant nagging feeling that you're trying to force a square peg into a round
hole. This feeling is only magnified by even 30 seconds of experience with an
iPad, which, I repeat, *is not a laptop*, but nevertheless feels not only
natural but actually *delightful* in the way that an interface does when it is
thoughtfully designed from the ground up to be so.

I spent very little time talking about the Surface Pen here. Quick thoughts: the
Surface Pen is amazing. Microsoft put a Wacom digitizer in there and it is every
bit as responsive and satisfying to use as you would hope. The Surface Pen is
the best thing about the Surface Pro. You just have to fight with everything
else about it during every other moment that you're touching it, and for me
that did not average out to a tolerable experience.

So yeah, those are my totally unfiltered thoughts about the Microsoft Surface
Pro 6.

If you want to share your thoughts, there is a comment box down below. I read
them all. I promise.
