---
title: "A Company Cannot \"Kinda Care\""
date: 2021-06-04T13:22:52-04:00
---

In the same way that you can't "kinda like" pineapple on pizza---you either love
it or you hate it, never anything in between---a company can't "kinda care"
about anything, *especially* if it is among the company's publicly stated
values.

Moreover, it is becoming increasingly costly for companies who want to "kinda
care" about certain social, environmental, or humanitarian concerns to simply
stay silent about them.

<!--more-->

According to Forrester, 51% of Gen Xers "actively consider company values" when
making a purchase. A *staggering* 70% of Millennials do the same.

A steadily increasing number of companies espouse particular values publicly,
like Patagonia or TOMS, but the majority do not, and many pay lip service to one
or two specific concerns and leave the rest to the imagination. In these cases,
companies may feel that they're hedging their bets in the court of public
opinion, but in reality they may only be postponing a judgment.

In today's consumer climate, customers expect companies to be good global
citizens, whether they use those talking points in PR campaigns or not.

For example, companies that do manufacturing, or who participate in virtually
any supply chain whatsoever, or who raise capital of almost any kind, are
tacitly approving of the actions of every other company involved in those
activities.

If a company, say, sources electronics components from another country, and
somewhere along the line discovers that the producer of those components is
responsible for documented human rights abuses, the company has only two
choices: continue to source from that company, or stop.

Publicly, the company itself may advertise a great deal of concern for
humanitarian issues. Perhaps the company changed their logo to a rainbow design
for Pride Month, or frequently tweets support for the Black Lives Matter
movement, and it may even contribute materially to such causes domestically. But
if the company is actually *funding slavery overseas*, those gestures start to
mean less.

This is what I mean by "a company can't *kinda* care." A company's values are
the sum of its actions. Does it protect the environment and human rights, or
does it not?

We are living in a world where more and more customers care about whether even
the most trivial things are manufactured ethically and sustainably, and want to
buy from companies that support social and environmental responsibility in
material ways.

You don't get to earn those customers by simply *not* talking about your values.
